doc: add Node.js Threat Model (#45223)
nodejs/node: SECURITY.md

  the release process above to ensure that the disclosure is handled in a
  consistent manner.

## The Node.js threat model

Being able to cause a negative outcome in a way that requires control of the
elements that are trusted by Node.js is not considered a vulnerability in
Node.js.

Being able to cause the following through control of the elements that Node.js
does not trust is considered a vulnerability:

* Disclosure or loss of integrity or confidentiality of data protected through
  the correct use of Node.js APIs.
* The unavailability of the runtime, including the unbounded degradation of its
  performance.

If Node.js loads configuration files or runs code by default (without a
specific request from the user), and this is not documented, it is considered a
vulnerability.
Vulnerabilities related to this case may be fixed by a documentation update.

**Node.js does NOT trust**

> 1. The data from network connections that are created through the use of Node.js

Reviewer: Is the data in question here the `protocol data` or the `business data` or both? I guess it is the protocol data, because that is the one which relates to the vulnerabilities?

Reviewer 2: It's any data that Node.js acts on. Headers are a good example which does fall into protocal data, but if there was some way that crafting the business data could cause Node.js itself to do something unexpected/bad then that would also be covered.

   responsibility of the application to perform the required input validations.
5. Any connection used for inspector (debugger protocol) regardless of being
   opened by command line options or Node.js APIs, and regardless of the remote
   end being on the local machine or remote.
6. The file system when requiring a module.
   See <https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#all-together>.

Any unexpected behavior from the data manipulation from Node.js Internal
functions are considered a vulnerability.

In addition to addressing vulnerabilities based on the above, the project works
to avoid APIs and internal implementations that make it “easy” for application
code to use the APIs incorrectly in a way that results in vulnerabilities within
the application code itself. While we don’t consider those vulnerabilities in
Node.js itself and will not necessarily issue a CVE we do want them to be
reported privately to Node.js first.
We often choose to work to improve our APIs based on those reports and issue
fixes either in regular or security releases depending on how much of a risk to
the community they pose.

### Examples of vulneratibities

> ### Improper Certificate Validation (CWE-295)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Improper Certificate Validation (CWE-295)
```

* Node.js provides APIs to validate handling of Subject Alternative Names (SANs)
  in certficates used to connect to an https endpoint. If certificates can be
  crafted which result in incorrect validation by the Node.js APIs that is
  considered a vulnerability.
  
#### Inconsistent Interpretation of HTTP Requests (CWE-444)
  
* Node.js provides APIs to accept http connections. Those APIs parse the
  headers received for a connection and pass them on to the application.

>   Bugs in parsing those heads which can result in request smuggling are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Bugs in parsing those headers which can result in request smuggling are
```

  the release process above to ensure that the disclosure is handled in a
  consistent manner.

## The Node.js threat model

Being able to cause a negative outcome in a way that requires control of the
elements that are trusted by Node.js is not considered a vulnerability in
Node.js.

Being able to cause the following through control of the elements that Node.js
does not trust is considered a vulnerability:

* Disclosure or loss of integrity or confidentiality of data protected through
  the correct use of Node.js APIs.
* The unavailability of the runtime, including the unbounded degradation of its
  performance.

If Node.js loads configuration files or runs code by default (without a
specific request from the user), and this is not documented, it is considered a
vulnerability.
Vulnerabilities related to this case may be fixed by a documentation update.

> **Node.js does NOT trust**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Node.js does NOT trust**:
```

1. The data from network connections that are created through the use of Node.js
   APIs and which is transformed/validated by Node.js before being passed to the
   application. This includes:
   * HTTP APIs (all flavors) client and server APIs.
   * DNS APIs.
2. Consumers of data protected through the use of Node.js APIs (for example
   people who have access to data encrypted through the Node.js crypto APIs).
3. The file content or other I/O that is opened for reading or writing by the
   use of Node.js APIs (ex: stdin, stdout, stderr). In other words, if the
   content passing through Node.js to/from the application can trigger actions
   other than those documented for the APIs, the content is not trusted avoid
   causing those actions.

**Node.js trusts everything else**. As some examples this includes:

1. The developers and infrastructure that runs it.
2. The operating system that Node.js is running under and its configuration,
   along with anything under control of the operating system.

> 3. The code it is asked to run including JavaScript and native code, even if
>    said code is dynamically loaded, e.g. all dependencies installed from the npm registry.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. The code it is asked to run including JavaScript and native code, even if said
   code is dynamically loaded, e.g. all dependencies installed from the npm
   registry.
```

**Node.js trusts everything else**. As some examples this includes:

1. The developers and infrastructure that runs it.
2. The operating system that Node.js is running under and its configuration,
   along with anything under control of the operating system.
3. The code it is asked to run including JavaScript and native code, even if
   said code is dynamically loaded, e.g. all dependencies installed from the
   npm registry.
   The code run inherits all the privileges of the execution user.
4. Inputs provided to it by the code it is asked to run, as it is the
   responsibility of the application to perform the required input validations.
5. Any connection used for inspector (debugger protocol) regardless of being
   opened by command line options or Node.js APIs, and regardless of the remote
   end being on the local machine or remote.
6. The file system when requiring a module.
   See <https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#all-together>.

Any unexpected behavior from the data manipulation from Node.js Internal
functions are considered a vulnerability.

In addition to addressing vulnerabilities based on the above, the project works

> to avoid APIs and internal implementations that make it “easy” for application

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
to avoid APIs and internal implementations that make it "easy" for application
```

code to use the APIs incorrectly in a way that results in vulnerabilities within
the application code itself. While we don’t consider those vulnerabilities in
Node.js itself and will not necessarily issue a CVE we do want them to be
reported privately to Node.js first.
We often choose to work to improve our APIs based on those reports and issue
fixes either in regular or security releases depending on how much of a risk to
the community they pose.

### Examples of vulneratibities

#### Improper Certificate Validation (CWE-295)

* Node.js provides APIs to validate handling of Subject Alternative Names (SANs)

>   in certficates used to connect to an https endpoint. If certificates can be

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  in certficates used to connect to a TLS/SSL endpoint. If certificates can be
```

  crafted which result in incorrect validation by the Node.js APIs that is
  considered a vulnerability.

#### Inconsistent Interpretation of HTTP Requests (CWE-444)

* Node.js provides APIs to accept http connections. Those APIs parse the
  headers received for a connection and pass them on to the application.
  Bugs in parsing those headers which can result in request smuggling are
  considered vulnerabilities.

#### Missing Cryptographic Step (CWE-325)

* Node.js provides APIs to encrypt data. Bugs that would allow an attacker
  to get the orginal data without requiring the encryption key are
  considered vulnerabilities.

#### External Control of System or Configuration Setting (CWE-15)

* If Node.js automatically loads a configuration file which is not documented
  and modification of that configuration can affect the confidentiality of

>   data protected using the Node.js APIs this is considered a vulnerability.

Reviewer 5: What is "data protected using the Node.js APIs"? Which of our APIs protect data confidentiality?

Reviewer 2: When I wrote that a more specific example of what I had in mind was the opessl configuration file, if we don't document that we load the openssl configuration file and from where then by modifying it you can weaken the confidentiality of data communiated over an https connection.

Data is also protected through the Crypto APIs that allow data to be encrypted/decrypted.

### Examples of non-vulneratibities

#### Malicious Third-Party Modules (CWE-1357)

* Code is trusted by Node.js, therefore any scenario that requires a malicious
  third-party module cannot result in a vulnerability in Node.js.

#### Prototype Pollution Attacks (CWE-1321)

* Node.js trusts the inputs provided to it by application code.
  It is up to the application to sanitize appropriately, therefore any scenario

>   that requires control over user input is not considered a vulnerability.

Reviewer 5: FWIW, the description is not what I expected based on the header. (There have been some controversial efforts around prototype pollution resistance, but I'm not sure if that's relevant here.)

Reviewer 2: Prototype polution often requires some type of tainted external input that is then used in a way that can affect prototype pollution chains or is that a misunderstanding on my part?

#### Uncontrolled Search Path Element (CWE-427)

* Node.js trusts the file system in the environment accessible to it.
  Therefore, it is not a vulnerability if it accesses/loads files from any path

>   that is accessible to it.

Reviewer 5: I am not sure I understand the wording here. Is this, for example, about Node.js following symbolic links that might have been placed on the file system?

Reviewer 2: and that because we trust the file system that Node.js is running under if we find modules in that upward walk that is not a vulnerability.

  the release process above to ensure that the disclosure is handled in a
  consistent manner.

> ## What does Node.js trust/not trust

Reviewer 4: Maybe this instead? Not sure.

```suggest
## The Node.js threat model
```

Being able to cause a negative outcome in a way that requires control of the
elements that are trusted by Node.js is not considered a vulnerability in

> Node.js.

Reviewer 4: This sentence and the similar sentences below are difficult to read/understand, at least for me. I think it might be the passive voice "considered". (Considered by whom? What's the difference between "is X" and "is considered X"? In general, there is/was a lot of "is considered deprecated" and "is considered X" and I try to get rid of it. "X is considered deprecated" is less clear than "X is deprecated".)

Reviewer 4: Looking at this content, I do wonder if it's more appropriate in the HackerOne policy doc. Regardless, I wonder if it would be better formulated as something like this:

```md
Based on our threat model, Issues that we consider valid Node.js security concerns include:

* Lorem ipsum
* Lorem ipsum
* Lorem ipsum

Issues that we do not valid Node.js security concerns include:

* Lorem ipsum
* Lorem ipsum
* Lorem ipsum
```

Author: Honestly, I think the "Issues that are/aren't valid" is still confusing. @mhdawson any idea?

Reviewer 2: The goal was to avoid having to write out a full least which I think is impractical.  We are trying to express that we trust certain things and if an attack involves something malicious/wrong in those things then its not valid.

Reviewer 4: The purpose of this sentence is to identify what is out of scope for security researchers seeking a bug bounty. Is that basically correct?

Author: Basically, yes. Besides that, is for developers to understand when they are facing a bug or not.

Reviewer 4: Non-blocking (because someone can always do this after the document lands), but in that case, might we want to replace this sentence with something like this?:

```suggestion
In the Node.js threat model, there are trusted elements such as the
underlying operating system. Vulnerabilities that require the compromise
of these trusted elements are outside the scope of the Node.js threat
model.

For a vulnerability to be eligible for a bug bounty, it must be a
vulnerability in the context of the Node.js threat model. In other
words, it cannot assume that a trusted element (such as the operating
system) has been compromised.
```

Reviewer 2: Looks like a good change to me.

Being able to cause the following through control of the elements that Node.js
does not trust is considered a vulnerability:

* Disclosure or loss of integrity or confidentiality of data protected through
the correct use of Node.js APIs.
* The unavailability of the runtime, including the unbounded degradation of its
performance.

If Node.js loads configuration files or runs code by default (without a

> specific request from the user), and this is not documented, it is considered a

Author: We're assessing if that's a blocker for this PR or it can land without a documentation update for now.

Reviewer 2: My current take is that we are documenting/agreeing on what we should do with vulnerabilty reports. As soon as we agree I'm thinking we should take reports, I don't think we load all that many files and if we don't have them documented and people want to help identify them for us, that's not necessarily bad.

vulnerability.
Vulnerabilities related to this case may be fixed by a documentation update.

**Node.js does NOT trust**

1. The data from network connections that are created through the use of Node.js
   APIs and which is transformed/validated by Node.js before being passed to the
   application. This includes:
   * HTTP APIs (all flavors) client and server APIs.
   * DNS APIs.
2. Consumers of data protected through the use of Node.js APIs (for example

>    people who have access to data encrypted through the Node.js crypto apis).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
   people who have access to data encrypted through the Node.js crypto APIs).
```

> 3. The file content or other IO that is opened for reading or writing by the use
>    of Node.js APIs (ex: stdin, stdout, stderr). In other words, Node.js doesn’t
>    interpret buffers unless explicitly set by the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. The file content or other IO that is opened for reading or writing by the use
   of Node.js APIs (ex: stdin, stdout, stderr). In other words, if the content passing
   through Node.js to/from the application can trigger actions other than
   those documented for the APIs, the content is not trusted avoid causing
   those actions.
```

Reviewer 2: @RafaelGSS made a suggetion for this one. Still finding it hard to clearly explain.

Reviewer 4: Let's use `I/O` instead of `IO`. https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/i/input-output

4. Inputs provided to it by the code it is asked to run, as it is the
   responsibility of the application to perform the required input validations.
5. Any connection used for inspector (debugger protocol) regardless of being
   opened by command line options or Node.js APIs, and regardless of the remote
   end being on the local machine or remote.
6. The file system when requiring a module.
   See <https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#all-together>.

Any unexpected behavior from the data manipulation from Node.js Internal
functions are considered a vulnerability.

In addition to addressing vulnerabilities based on the above, the project works
to avoid APIs and internal implementations that make it “easy” for application
code to use the APIs incorrectly in a way that results in vulnerabilities within
the application code itself. While we don’t consider those vulnerabilities in
Node.js itself and will not necessarily issue a CVE we do want them to be
reported privately to Node.js first.
We often choose to work to improve our APIs based on those reports and issue
fixes either in regular or security releases depending on how much of a risk to
the community they pose.

> ### Some examples of applying this thread model include:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Examples
```

  the correct use of Node.js APIs.
* The unavailability of the runtime, including the unbounded degradation of its
  performance.

If Node.js loads configuration files or runs code by default (without a
specific request from the user), and this is not documented, it is considered a
vulnerability.
Vulnerabilities related to this case may be fixed by a documentation update.

**Node.js does NOT trust**

1. The data from network connections that are created through the use of Node.js
   APIs and which is transformed/validated by Node.js before being passed to the
   application. This includes:
   * HTTP APIs (all flavors) client and server APIs.
   * DNS APIs.
2. Consumers of data protected through the use of Node.js APIs (for example
   people who have access to data encrypted through the Node.js crypto APIs).
3. The file content or other I/O that is opened for reading or writing by the
   use of Node.js APIs (ex: stdin, stdout, stderr). In other words, if the
   content passing through Node.js to/from the application can trigger actions
   other than those documented for the APIs, the content is not trusted avoid

>    causing those actions.

Reviewer 7: This last sentence is not clear.

Author: Yeah. We've been struggling with that. The idea is to say that we don't interpret content when reading files or any I/O such as buffer/stdin/stderr...

Reviewer 2: I'm still wondering if we should remove 3 from the list. I think we trust the application to manage the content that it passes to the APIs. For example if they ask us to read a file that is so big that we OOM then that's on the application.

Maybe we could instead add this line after the "If Node.js loads configuration files...."

If Node.js runs code due to the invocation of an API that does not document that code will be executed when the API is invoked, it is considered a vulnerability.

Author: What do you think @mcollina ?

Reviewer 7: The following part is not clear to me:

> the content is not trusted avoid causing those actions

I would break the last sentence out of the bullet point and rewrite as follows:

> In other words, if the data passing through Node.js to/from the application can trigger actions other than those documented for the APIs, there is likely a security vulnerability. Examples of unwanted actions are polluting globals, causing an unrecoverable crash, or any other unexpected side effects that can lead to a loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. Applied.

**Node.js trusts everything else**. As some examples this includes:

1. The developers and infrastructure that runs it.
2. The operating system that Node.js is running under and its configuration,
   along with anything under control of the operating system.
3. The code it is asked to run including JavaScript and native code, even if

>    said code is dynamically loaded. The code run inherits all the privileges of

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
   said code is dynamically loaded, e.g. all dependencies installed from the npm registry.
   The code run inherits all the privileges of
```

4. Inputs provided to it by the code it is asked to run, as it is the
   responsibility of the application to perform the required input validations.
5. Any connection used for inspector (debugger protocol) regardless of being
   opened by command line options or Node.js APIs, and regardless of the remote
   end being on the local machine or remote.
6. The file system when requiring a module.
   See <https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#all-together>.

Any unexpected behavior from the data manipulation from Node.js Internal
functions are considered a vulnerability.

In addition to addressing vulnerabilities based on the above, the project works
to avoid APIs and internal implementations that make it “easy” for application
code to use the APIs incorrectly in a way that results in vulnerabilities within
the application code itself. While we don’t consider those vulnerabilities in
Node.js itself and will not necessarily issue a CVE we do want them to be
reported privately to Node.js first.
We often choose to work to improve our APIs based on those reports and issue
fixes either in regular or security releases depending on how much of a risk to
the community they pose.

> ### Examples

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
### Examples of non-vulneratibities
```
